README.md, before:

## Flecs Zig Bindings
Flecs v3's node system is still under development so the code in this repository is likely to change over time to match the latest Flecs changes.

#### TODO:
- add multi world support. `meta.componentId` needs to somehow get scoped to a world without having to resport to `World(store_id: u8)` as the type
- query maker struct: needs to support `instanced`, `pairs` (including multiple of same type), `terms[n].subj.set.mask`
- consider making `TermInfo` fields optional and use that optionality instead of the default value to determine which are set
- query maker struct: consider making the `order_by`, `instanced` and all other options match the exactly layout of `ecs_query_desc_t` so we can just overlay it directly similar to how `mem.zeroInit` does it. If too many things need to be configurable this will be necessary.


### New Iterator API and Query Builder
An expermiental filter/query/system builder + iterator builder in once concept is now in the codebase. You define a struct (`MoveSystemData` below) with
the fields being the terms you want from the query returned to you. Flecs allows some more complex features that you can access by providing data in the
`modifiers` static. Terms that arent actually returned (such as filters and not terms) can be defined here. You can also annotate the fields in the struct
with additional modifiers to make them part of an `or` term or mark them as writeonly.

```zig
const q = flecs.queries;

const MoveSystemData = struct {
    vel: *const Velocity, // In + And
    acc: ?*Acceleration, // needs metadata. could be Or or Optional. If no metadata can assume Optional.
    player: ?*Player,
    enemy: ?*Enemy,

    // allowed modifiers: Filter, Not, WriteOnly, Or (soon AndFrom, OrFrom, NotFrom for using type collections)
    pub const modifiers = .{ q.Filter(PopTart), q.Filter(q.Or(Player, Enemy)), q.Writeonly(Acceleration), q.Not(SomethingWeDontWantMatching) };
    pub const order_by = orderBy; // used only by systems and queries
    pub const name = "SuperSystem";
};

var filter = world.filter(MoveSystemData);
// iterate filter as below
```


### Random Info
Reflection metadata is enabled by default. To disable it in your root zig file add `pub const disable_reflection = true;`


### Terms
Terms are used to iterate a single component type.

```zig
var term = flecs.Term(Position).init(world);
defer term.deinit();

// iterate with a standard iterator
var term_iter = term.iterator();
while (term_iter.next()) |pos| {
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, entity: {d}\n", .{ pos, term_iter.entity() });
}

// iterate with a function called for each entity that has the component
term.each(eachTerm);

fn eachTerm(entity: flecs.EntityId, pos: *Position) void {
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, entity: {d}\n", .{ pos, entity });
}
```


### Filter
A filter is a list of terms that are matched against entities. Filters are cheap to create and match entities as iteration takes place. This makes them a good fit for scenarios where an application doesn't know in advance what it has to query for, a typical use case for this being runtime tags. Another advantage of filters is that while they can be reused, their cheap creation time doesn't require it.

```zig
// QueryBuilder is used to define what you want to filter for
var builder = flecs.QueryBuilder.init(world)
    .withReadonly(Position)
    .with(Velocity)
    .optional(Acceleration)
    .either(Player, Enemy);

var filter = builder.buildFilter();
defer filter.deinit();

// iterate with a standard iterator
var filter_iter = filter.iterator();
while (filter_iter.next()) |_| {
    // the appropriate get* method must be used and is validated in debug builds. `get` is for mutable components, `getConst` is for readonly components
    // and `getOpt/getOptConst` are for optional components and those added to the QueryBuilder with `either`
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, vel: {d}, player: {d}\n",
        .{ filter_iter.getConst(Position), filter_iter.get(Velocity), filter_iter.getOpt(Player) });
}

// iterate with a function called for each entity that matches the filter. The same rules apply as above for the struct passed in.
filter.each(eachFilter);

// save as `each` with the only difference being each component is a separate parameter.
filter.each(eachFilterSeperateParams);

fn eachFilter(e: struct { pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy }) void {
    std.debug.print("comps: {any}\n", .{e});
}

fn eachFilterSeperateParams(pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy) void {
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, vel: {d}, acc: {d}, player: {d}, enemy: {d}\n", .{ pos, vel, acc, player, enemy });
}
```


### Queries
A query is like a filter in that it is a list of terms that is matched with entities. The difference with a filter is that queries cache their results, which makes them more expensive to create, but cheaper to iterate.

```zig
// QueryBuilder is used to define what you want to filter for
var builder = flecs.QueryBuilder.init(world)
    .withReadonly(Position)
    .with(Velocity)
    .optional(Acceleration)
    .either(Player, Enemy)
    .orderBy(Position, orderBy);

var query = builder.buildQuery();
defer query.deinit();

std.debug.print("\n\niterate a Query with an Iterator\n", .{});
var entity_iter = query.Iterator(struct { pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy });
while (entity_iter.next()) |comps| {
    std.debug.print("comps: {any}\n", .{comps});
}

std.debug.print("\n\niterate a Query with a TableIterator\n", .{});
var table_iter = query.tableIterator(struct { pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy });
while (table_iter.next()) |it| {
    var i: usize = 0;
    while (i < it.count) : (i += 1) {
        const accel = if (it.data.acc) |acc| acc[i] else null;
        const player = if (it.data.player) |play| play[i] else null;
        const enemy = if (it.data.enemy) |en| en[i] else null;
        std.debug.print("i: {d}, pos: {d}, vel: {d}, acc: {d}, player: {d}, enemy: {d}\n", .{ i, it.data.pos[i], it.data.vel[i], accel, player, enemy });
    }
}

std.debug.print("\n\niterate with a Query each\n", .{});
query.each(eachQuery);

std.debug.print("\n\niterate with a Query each\n", .{});
query.each(eachQuerySeperateParams);

fn eachQuery(e: struct { pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy }) void {
    std.debug.print("comps: {any}\n", .{e});
}

fn eachQuerySeperateParams(pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy) void {
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, vel: {d}, acc: {d}, player: {d}, enemy: {d}\n", .{ pos, vel, acc, player, enemy });
}
```


### Systems (zigifed wrapper coming soon)
A system is a query combined with a callback. Systems can be either ran manually or ran as part of an ECS-managed main loop.


### Observers/Triggers (coming soon)

Commit message:

Pair and Mask support
named fields for modifiers

README.md, after:

## Flecs Zig Bindings
Flecs v3's node system is still under development so the code in this repository is likely to change over time to match the latest Flecs changes.

#### TODO:
- add multi world support. `meta.componentId` needs to somehow get scoped to a world without having to resport to `World(store_id: u8)` as the type
- consider making `TermInfo` fields optional and use that optionality instead of the default value to determine which are set
- query maker struct: consider making the `order_by`, `instanced` and all other options match the exactly layout of `ecs_query_desc_t` so we can just overlay it directly similar to how `mem.zeroInit` does it. If too many things need to be configurable this will be necessary.
- switch support


### New Iterator API and Query Builder
An expermiental filter/query/system builder + iterator builder in once concept is now in the codebase. You define a struct (`MoveSystemData` below) with
the fields being the terms you want from the query returned to you. Flecs allows some more complex features that you can access by providing data in the
`modifiers` static. Terms that arent actually returned (such as filters and not terms) can be defined here. You can also annotate the fields in the struct
with additional modifiers to make them part of an `Or` term or mark them as writeonly.

```zig
const q = flecs.queries;

const MoveSystemData = struct {
    vel: *const Velocity, // In + And
    acc: ?*Acceleration, // needs metadata. could be Or or Optional. If no metadata can assume Optional.
    player: ?*Player,
    enemy: ?*Enemy,

    // allowed modifiers: Filter, Not, WriteOnly, Or, Mask, Pair (soon AndFrom, OrFrom, NotFrom for using type collections)
    pub const modifiers = .{ q.Filter(PopTart), q.Filter(q.Or(Player, Enemy)), q.Writeonly(Acceleration), q.Not(SomethingWeDontWantMatching) };
    pub const order_by = orderBy; // used only by systems and queries
    pub const name = "SuperSystem";
};

var filter = world.filter(MoveSystemData);
// iterate filter as below
```

Note that there are some special modifiers, mainly `Or` and `Pair`. When nesting these types they must be the _innermost modifier_. For example, if you want to have a `Pair` with its relation being writeonly the `Pair` must be nested inside the `Writeonly` modifier. The following would make the `Position` component writeonly: `q.Writeonly(q.Pair(Position, World))`.

There are times when you may have the same component type as multiple fields in your query struct. For example, you may have an object with a local `Position` and a world `Position`. By default, modifiers act on the first component that matches their type. For cases where you want to add a modifier to a different term there are modifiers with the `I` suffix that let you pass in a field name to target the field you want to.

A slightly more complex example is below to illustrate this. The positions are defined as `Pairs` using the `Local` and `World` tag structs (zero-field structs). This example also illustrates nested modifiers for a `Pair`. The second modifier makes the `pos_world` field writeonly. Note that the `Pair` is the innermost modifier and the field name only needs to be present on the outermost modifier.

```zig
const DoublePosition = struct {
    pos_local: *const Position,
    pos_world: *Position,

    pub var modifiers = .{ q.PairI(Position, Local, "pos_local"), q.WriteonlyI(q.Pair(Position, World), "pos_world") };
};
```


### Random Info
Reflection metadata is enabled by default. To disable it in your root zig file add `pub const disable_reflection = true;`


### Terms
Terms are used to iterate a single component type.

```zig
var term = flecs.Term(Position).init(world);
defer term.deinit();

// iterate with a standard iterator
var term_iter = term.iterator();
while (term_iter.next()) |pos| {
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, entity: {d}\n", .{ pos, term_iter.entity() });
}

// iterate with a function called for each entity that has the component
term.each(eachTerm);

fn eachTerm(entity: flecs.EntityId, pos: *Position) void {
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, entity: {d}\n", .{ pos, entity });
}
```


### Filter
A filter is a list of terms that are matched against entities. Filters are cheap to create and match entities as iteration takes place. This makes them a good fit for scenarios where an application doesn't know in advance what it has to query for, a typical use case for this being runtime tags. Another advantage of filters is that while they can be reused, their cheap creation time doesn't require it.

```zig
// QueryBuilder is used to define what you want to filter for
var builder = flecs.QueryBuilder.init(world)
    .withReadonly(Position)
    .with(Velocity)
    .optional(Acceleration)
    .either(Player, Enemy);

var filter = builder.buildFilter();
defer filter.deinit();

// iterate with a standard iterator
var filter_iter = filter.iterator();
while (filter_iter.next()) |_| {
    // the appropriate get* method must be used and is validated in debug builds. `get` is for mutable components, `getConst` is for readonly components
    // and `getOpt/getOptConst` are for optional components and those added to the QueryBuilder with `either`
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, vel: {d}, player: {d}\n",
        .{ filter_iter.getConst(Position), filter_iter.get(Velocity), filter_iter.getOpt(Player) });
}

// iterate with a function called for each entity that matches the filter. The same rules apply as above for the struct passed in.
filter.each(eachFilter);

// save as `each` with the only difference being each component is a separate parameter.
filter.each(eachFilterSeperateParams);

fn eachFilter(e: struct { pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy }) void {
    std.debug.print("comps: {any}\n", .{e});
}

fn eachFilterSeperateParams(pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy) void {
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, vel: {d}, acc: {d}, player: {d}, enemy: {d}\n", .{ pos, vel, acc, player, enemy });
}
```


### Queries
A query is like a filter in that it is a list of terms that is matched with entities. The difference with a filter is that queries cache their results, which makes them more expensive to create, but cheaper to iterate.

```zig
// QueryBuilder is used to define what you want to filter for
var builder = flecs.QueryBuilder.init(world)
    .withReadonly(Position)
    .with(Velocity)
    .optional(Acceleration)
    .either(Player, Enemy)
    .orderBy(Position, orderBy);

var query = builder.buildQuery();
defer query.deinit();

std.debug.print("\n\niterate a Query with an Iterator\n", .{});
var entity_iter = query.Iterator(struct { pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy });
while (entity_iter.next()) |comps| {
    std.debug.print("comps: {any}\n", .{comps});
}

std.debug.print("\n\niterate a Query with a TableIterator\n", .{});
var table_iter = query.tableIterator(struct { pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy });
while (table_iter.next()) |it| {
    var i: usize = 0;
    while (i < it.count) : (i += 1) {
        const accel = if (it.data.acc) |acc| acc[i] else null;
        const player = if (it.data.player) |play| play[i] else null;
        const enemy = if (it.data.enemy) |en| en[i] else null;
        std.debug.print("i: {d}, pos: {d}, vel: {d}, acc: {d}, player: {d}, enemy: {d}\n", .{ i, it.data.pos[i], it.data.vel[i], accel, player, enemy });
    }
}

std.debug.print("\n\niterate with a Query each\n", .{});
query.each(eachQuery);

std.debug.print("\n\niterate with a Query each\n", .{});
query.each(eachQuerySeperateParams);

fn eachQuery(e: struct { pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy }) void {
    std.debug.print("comps: {any}\n", .{e});
}

fn eachQuerySeperateParams(pos: *const Position, vel: *Velocity, acc: ?*Acceleration, player: ?*Player, enemy: ?*Enemy) void {
    std.debug.print("pos: {d}, vel: {d}, acc: {d}, player: {d}, enemy: {d}\n", .{ pos, vel, acc, player, enemy });
}
```


### Systems (zigifed wrapper coming soon)
A system is a query combined with a callback. Systems can be either ran manually or ran as part of an ECS-managed main loop.


### Observers/Triggers (coming soon)
